---
layout: post
title: "Wake on Lan setup!"
date: 2024-08-30 15:25:00 +0200
categories: self-hosted homelab linux
tags: homelab linux cli
image:
  path: /assets/img/headers/home-server-room.webp
  lqip: 

---

WoL must be activated in the BIOS before changing network card driver settings. Wake-on values determine what activity triggers wake-up: d (disabled), p (PHY activity), u (unicast activity), m (multicast activity), b (broadcast activity), a (ARP activity) and g (magic packet activity). The value of g is required for WoL activity if it is not set. The following command enables the WoL function on the controller:

```sh
apt-get update && apt-get install ethtool
ethtool -s interface wol g
```

**Making the configuration permanent.**

1. **systemd.link** - Link-level configuration is possible through systemd.link files. The actual setup is performed by the net_setup_link udev builtin. Add the WakeOnLan option to the network link file:

```
/etc/systemd/network/50-wired.link

[Match]
MACAddress=aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff

[Link]
NamePolicy=kernel database onboard slot path
MACAddressPolicy=persistent
WakeOnLan=magic
```

**Note:**
- Only the first matching file is applied. The content of the default link file /usr/lib/systemd/network/99-default.link shipped with systemd has to be included, otherwise the interface might be misconfigured.
- To be considered, the file name should alphabetically come before the default 99-default.link. For example 50-wired.link works.
- This configuration applies only to the link-level, and is independent of network-level daemons such as NetworkManager or systemd-networkd.
- In the Match section, OriginalName= can also be used to identify the interface.
 
2. **systemd service** - This is an equivalent of previous systemd.link option, but uses a standalone systemd service.

```sh
nano /etc/systemd/system/wol.service
```

```
[Unit]
Description=Wake-on-LAN for <interface id>
Requires=network.target
After=network.target

[Service]
ExecStart=/usr/sbin/ethtool -s <interface id> wol g
ExecStop=/usr/sbin/ethtool -s <interface id> wol g
 
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

```sh
systemctl start wol.service
systemctl enable wol.service
systemctl is-enabled wol.service
systemctl daemon-reload
```